---
title: About
layout: page
---

<img style="border-radius:100%" alt="Nicolas Hug" src="{{ site.url }}/assets/images/nico.jpg">

Hi, I'm Nicolas! I just got a PhD in Machine Learning from <a
href="https://www.irit.fr/?lang=en">IRIT</a> lab, and I am now looking for a
job. I currently live in France but I'm very flexible and mobile, willing to
work abroad.

I'm also the main developer of <a href="http://surpriselib.com/">Surprise</a>,
an open source Python library for building recommender systems.

While my educational background is that of a software engineer, my research
work as a PhD student allows me to be also well-versed in machine learning (and
of course data science), on both theoretical and practical aspects. I have
developed a solid mathematical background (statistics, linear algebra,
optimization...) over the years.

I am highly proficient in Python and C, and very familiar with Python’s
scientific tools (Scikit-learn, Numpy, Pandas, Matplotlib) and with Cython (for
optimization).

I developed (and now maintain) [Surprise](http://surpriselib.com), a Python
library to build and analyze recommender systems. This project has been the
opportunity to combine my theoretical understanding of machine learning and my
programming skills into a complete, useful and easy-to-use software, which I
believe showcases my range of skills.

The goal of my PhD was to study the empirical behaviour of analogical
classifiers (somewhat related to k-NN classifiers) and to exhibit some of their
theoretical properties. I was supervised by [Henri
Prade](https://www.irit.fr/~Henri.Prade/), [Gilles
Richard](https://www.irit.fr/~Gilles.Richard/), and Mathieu Serrurier. Two of
my main publications so far are:
- [ECAI'16](http://www.ecai2016.org/): [Analogical Classifiers: A Theoretical
  Perspective](http://ebooks.iospress.com/volumearticle/44815).
- [IJCAI'17](http://ijcai-17.org): Analogy-preserving functions: A way to
  extend Boolean samples (to be published).

During my free time, you may find me rock climbing or hiking, lost somewhere in
the Pyrénées (French mountains)... I always enjoy any kind of outdoor physical
activity, which is quite fortunate given one of my other passions: food!

If you want to know more about me, please check out my <a
href="{{site.base.url}}/assets/Nicolas_Hug_CV.pdf">Resume</a>!
